[TEP-0079] Catalog Automated Testing and Tekton Dogfooding (#914)
tektoncd/community: teps/0079-tekton-catalog-support-tiers.md

### Automated Testing and Dogfooding

In this section, we design the automated test infrastructure and test pipelines setup for both Verified Catalogs and Community Catalogs.

#### Test Pipelines

> Following the Catalog Contract defined in [TEP-0115](https://github.com/tektoncd/community/blob/main/teps/0115-tekton-catalog-git-based-versioning.md#organization-contract), the owners need to provide one or more test `pipelines` in the `./{resource-type}/{resource-name}/tests/run.yaml` file of the catalog resource directories to run the integration test for the resource.

Reviewer: nit: the user is providing a pipeline but the file is called run.yaml?

Author: Good point, we use `run.yaml` today but the naming can be improved for sure. Let's call it `pipelineRun.yaml`？

Author: Hi @dibyom, I have changed it to `pipelineRun.yaml`. PTAL~

> Following the Catalog Contract defined in [TEP-0115](https://github.com/tektoncd/community/blob/main/teps/0115-tekton-catalog-git-based-versioning.md#organization-contract), the owners need to provide one or more test `pipelines` in the `./{resource-type}/{resource-name}/tests/run.yaml` file of the catalog resource directories to run the integration test for the resource.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Following the Catalog Contract defined in [TEP-0115][tep-0115], the owners need to provide one or more test `pipelines` in the `./{resource-type}/{resource-name}/tests/run.yaml` file of the catalog resource directories to run the integration test for the resource.
```

Reviewer 2: nit: please format the other links as shown above -- to be consistent with the rest of the TEP and make it easier to read

Author: Thanks for the feedback! I have update the format across the file. PTAL.

          esac
```

#### Verified Catalog Testing Infrastructure

In this section, we design the test infrastructure for the Verified Catalogs based on the `test pipeline` setup as described above.

As discussed in [TEP-0115](https://github.com/tektoncd/community/blob/main/teps/0115-tekton-catalog-git-based-versioning.md#tekton-catalog-github-organization), the Verified Catalogs will be hosted as separate repositories in the [tektoncd-catalog](https://github.com/tektoncd-catalog) GitHub organization. These repositories are owned by Tekton Maintainers and should follow the `tektoncd` [project requirements](https://github.com/tektoncd/community/blob/main/process.md#project-requirements).

The Verified Catalogs test should use the existing infrastructure provided in the [plumbing repo](https://github.com/tektoncd/plumbing) to meet the same standard of automation with other `tektoncd` projects. Specifically, we will continue to use `Prow`  and the existing [Prow Cluster](https://github.com/tektoncd/plumbing/blob/main/docs/prow.md) for repository and organization management requirements (i.e. label management, reviewer auto assignment, and pull request management...).

> To dogfood Tekton, We propose to use vanilla Tekton as the test automation infrastructure for the Verified Catalogs, leveraging the [Dogfooding Cluster](https://github.com/tektoncd/plumbing/blob/main/docs/dogfooding.md) and the existing [Tekton setup](https://github.com/tektoncd/plumbing/blob/main/tekton/README.md) in the plumbing repo.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To dogfood Tekton, we propose using Tekton as the test automation infrastructure for the Verified Catalogs, leveraging the [Dogfooding Cluster](https://github.com/tektoncd/plumbing/blob/main/docs/dogfooding.md) and the existing [Tekton setup](https://github.com/tektoncd/plumbing/blob/main/tekton/README.md) in the plumbing repo.
```

Author: Thanks, updated!

  - If the resource is on a valid path
  - If the resource is a valid Tekton Resource
  - If all mandatory fields are added to the resource file
  - If all images used in Task Spec are tagged
  - If platforms are specified in a correct format

We propose to use [Catlin Task](https://github.com/tektoncd/plumbing/blob/main/tekton/ci/jobs/tekton-catalog-catlin-lint.yaml) in the build test. This is a conceptual flow:

  ```
           |                              |
           v                              v
  start-build-test-GitHub-check      git-batch-merge
                                          |
                                          v
                                     catlin-lint
                                          |
                                          v      
                              update-build-test-GitHub-check
                                          |
                                          v     
                                    upload-logs                                                                          
  ```

#### Community Catalog Template Testing Infrastructure

> The test infrastructure in the plumbing repo is designed for all `tektoncd` projects, which may not fit a Community Catalog repo's needs and may be too complicated for the authors to start with. To encourage Community Catalog authors to set up automated tests for their catalogs (using Tekton!), we propose to provide a template repo in the `tektoncd-catalog` GitHub org for Community Catalog authors to follow. This tutorial-like template should contain the **simple and minimum** required setup for the automated build tests and integration tests, guiding Community Catalog authors to achieve the same testing functionality as the Verified Catalogs using vanilla Tekton primitives.

Reviewer: Are we suggesting each project have their own eventlistener?

                                                  |
                                                  v
                                            kind-e2e-test
                                                  |
                                                  v      
                                  update-integration-test-GitHub-check
                                                  |
                                                  v     
                                            upload-logs                                                                          
  ```

###### Nightly Integration Test

We propose to test the Verified Catalogs against the **latest nightly release** of `Tekton Pipelines` as periodic nightly jobs. 

The pro and con of this approach are the same: we may catch issues with Tekton Pipelines itself. Since backward incompatible changes require an ApiGroup bump, this should never fail, but probably sometimes will. Failures here are probably caused by bugs in Tekton Pipelines. This means we may catch more issues before releases, but also means that Catalog tests may fail for non-catalog related reasons.

> Since these failures are more likely to be caused by Tekton Pipelines than by the Tasks, we will only run these as periodic nightly jobs and not let these failures block a PR merge. It will be up to Tekton Catalog Maintainers to track down their failures.

Reviewer 2: can we send slack notifications to maintainers? wondering how the tekton pipelines maintainers can be aware of the failures in nightly releases that are caught in the nightly catalog tests

Author: SGTM! I have updated this section. PTAL!

The Verified Catalogs test should use the existing infrastructure provided in the [plumbing repo][plumbing] to meet the same standard of automation with other `tektoncd` projects. Specifically, we will continue to use `Prow`  and the existing [Prow Cluster][prow-cluster] for repository and organization management requirements (i.e. label management, reviewer auto assignment, and pull request management...).

To dogfood Tekton, we propose to use Tekton as the test automation infrastructure for the Verified Catalogs, leveraging the [Dogfooding Cluster][dogfooding-cluster] and the existing [Tekton setup][plumbing-tekton] in the plumbing repo.

We propose two required tests and the corresponding GitHub checks for the Verified Catalogs:

##### Integration Test

The integration tests SHOULD run the catalog resource from end to end. The integration tests should be run both as a CI gated check on PR merge and on a nightly basis.

> We propose to use the [kind-e2e task][kind-e2e] to spin up a `KinD` cluster to run the test `pipelines` when triggered. The `kind-e2e task` executes the `./test/e2e-tests.sh` script in the target catalog which then runs the test `pipelines` in the catalog resource directories(`./{resource-type}/{resource-name}/tests/pipelineRun.yaml`). The `Tekton Pipelines` versions to be tested against can be configured in the `./test/e2e-tests.sh` script, which will be further discussed in the below sections.

Author: SGTM, updated!

        ...
      workspaces:
      - name: comment-file
        workspace: source
    - name: update-github-check
      taskRef:
        name: update-github-check
      params:
      - name: status
        value: completed
      - name: conclusion
        value: $(tasks.lint-catalog.status)
      - name: jwt-token
        value: $(tasks.generate-token.results.token)
      - name: check-run-name
        value: pull-tekton-catalog-build-tests
        ...
```

#### Design Evaluation

This design proposes an automated testing strategy to ensure the high quality of the Verified Catalogs while achieving the same amount of automation as other `tektoncd` projects by leveraging the plumping repo. This proposal tries to maximize the use of Tekton native components, which enhance Tekton adoption as "a powerful and flexible framework for creating CI/CD systems" and reveals potential limitations. This design also proposes a tutorial-like template with the simplest and minimum end-to-end testing infra setup to encourage the community Catalog authors to follow, which helps build a robust and sustainable Community Tekton Catalog ecosystem. 

#### Future Work

> For now, all the resources in the Verified Catalogs are in `v1beta1` and we only run tests on `v1beta1` API version. Since the community is working on `v1` API version support, we should consider to upgrade the resources in Verified Catalogs and corresponding tests to `v1` API version once it is supported.

Author: SG! Updated.
